Two households, both alikein dignity,
In fair Verona, where welay our scene,
From ancient grudge breakto new mutiny,
Where civil blood makescivil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loinsof these two foes
A pair of star-cross'dlovers take their life;
Whose misadventuredpiteous overthrows
Doth with their death burytheir parents' strife.
The fearful passage oftheir death-mark'd love,
And the continuance oftheir parents' rage,
Which, but theirchildren's end, noughtcould remove,
Is now the two hours'traffic of our stage;
The which if you withpatient ears attend,
What here shall miss, ourtoil shall strive to mend.
Gregory, o' my word, we'llnot carry coals.
No, for then we should becolliers.
I strike quickly, beingmoved.
The quarrel is between ourmasters and us their men.
'Tis all one, I will showmyself a tyrant:
when I have fought withthe men,
I will be civil with themaids, and cut off theirheads.
The heads of the maids?
Ay, the heads of themaids, or theirmaidenheads;
take it in what sense thouwilt.
They must take it in sensethat feel it.
Me they shall feel whilstI am able to stand:
and 'tis known I am apretty piece of flesh.
Draw thy tool!
Here come two of the houseof the Montagues.
Quarrel, I'll back thee.
How! Turn thy back andrun?
Fear me not.
No, marry; I fear thee!
Let us take the law of oursides;
let them begin.
I will frown as I pass by,
and let them take it asthey list.
Nay, as they dare.
I will bite my thumb atthem;
which is a disgrace tothem, if they bear it.
Do you bite your thumb atus, sir?
I do bite my thumb, sir.
Is the law of our side, ifI say ay?
No.
No, sir, I do not bite mythumb at you, sir,
but I do bite my thumb,sir.
Do you quarrel, sir?
Quarrel sir!
No, sir.
If you do, sir, I am foryou: I serve as good a manas you.
No better?
Say 'better:' here comesone of our master'skinsmen.
Yes, better, sir.
You lie.
Gregory!
Remember thy swashingblow.
Part, fools!
Put up your swords; youknow not what you do.
Turn thee, Benvolio, lookupon thy death.
I do but keep the peace:put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part thesemen with me.
What, drawn, and talk ofpeace!
I hate the word,
As I hate hell, allMontagues, and thee.
Down with the Capulets!
Down with the Montagues!
What noise is this?
Give me my long sword, ho!
A crutch, a crutch!
Why call you for a sword?
My sword, I say!
Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his bladein spite of me.
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.
Thou shalt not stir onefoot to seek a foe.
Rebellious subjects,enemies to peace,
Profaners of thisneighbour- stainedsteel,--
Will they not hear?
What, ho!
You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire ofyour pernicious rage
With purple fountainsissuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, fromthose bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'dweapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence ofyour moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bredof an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, andMontague,
Have thrice disturb'd thequiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancientcitizens
Cast by their gravebeseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, inhands as old,
Canker'd with peace, topart your canker'd hate:
If ever you disturb ourstreets again,
Your lives shall pay theforfeit of the peace.
For this time, all therest depart away:
Capulet, you shall goalong with me:
Montague, come you thisafternoon,
To hear our furtherpleasure in this case,
Once more, on pain ofdeath, all men depart.
O, where is Romeo?
Saw you him to-day?
Right glad I am he was notat this fray.
Madam, an hour before theworshipp'd sun
Peer'd forth the goldenwindow of the east,
A troubled mind drew me towalk abroad;
Where, underneath thegrove of sycamore
That westward rooteth fromthe city's side,
So early walking did I seeyour son:
Towards him I made, but hewas ware of me
And stole into the covertof the wood.
Many a morning hath hethere been seen,
With tears augmenting thefresh morning's dew.
Adding to clouds moreclouds with his deepsighs;
But all so soon as theall-cheering sun
Should in the furthesteast begin to draw
The shady curtains fromAurora's bed,
Away from the light stealshome my heavy son,
And private in his chamberpens himself,
Shuts up his windows,locks far daylight out
And makes himself anartificial night:
Black and portentous mustthis humour prove,
Unless good counsel maythe cause remove.
My noble uncle, do youknow the cause?
I neither know it nor canlearn of him.
Have you importuned him byany means?
Both by myself and manyother friends.
Could we but learn fromwhence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly givecure as know.
Trust me, my lord: soplease you, step aside;
I'll know his grievance,or be much denied.
Good-morrow, cousin.
Is the day so young?
But new struck nine.
Ay me!
Sad hours seem long.
What sadness lengthensRomeo's hours?
Not having that, which,having, makes them short.
In love?
Out--
Of love?
Out of her favour, whereI'm in love.
Alas, that love, so gentlein his view,
Should be so tyrannous andrough in proof!
Alas, that love, whoseview is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, seepathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?
O me!
What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for Ihave heard it all.
Here's much to do withhate, but more with love.
Why, then, O brawlinglove!
O loving hate!
O any thing, of nothingfirst create!
O heavy lightness!
Serious vanity!
Mis-shapen chaos ofwell-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, brightsmoke, cold fire, sickhealth!
This love feel I, thatfeel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?
No, coz, I rather weep.
Good heart, at what?
At thy good heart'soppression.
Why, such is love'stransgression.
Love is a smoke raisedwith the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a firesparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vex'd a seanourish'd with loveringtears:
What is it else? a madnessmost discreet,
A choking gall and apreserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.
Soft!
I will go along;
An if you leave me so, youdo me wrong.
I've lost myself; I'm nothere;
This is not Romeo, he'ssome other where.
Tell me in sadness, who isthat you love.
What, shall I groan andtell thee?
Groan, why, no.
But sadly tell me who.
In sadness, cousin, I dolove a woman.
I aim'd so near, when Isupposed you loved.
A right good mark-man!
And she's fair I love.
A right fair mark, faircoz, is soonest hit.
Well, in that hit youmiss: she'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow.
Then she hath sworn thatshe will still livechaste?
She hath, and in thatsparing makes huge waste.
She hath forsworn to love,and in that vow
Do I live dead that liveto tell it now.
Be ruled by me, forget tothink of her.
Teach me how I shouldforget to think.
By giving liberty untothine eyes;
Examine other beauties.
He that is strucken blindcannot forget
The precious treasure ofhis eyesight lost:
Show me a mistress that ispassing fair,
What doth her beautyserve, but as a note
Where I may read whopass'd that passing fair?
Farewell: thou canst notteach me to forget.
I'll pay that doctrine, orelse die in debt.
But Montague is bound aswell as I,
In penalty alike; and 'tisnot hard, I think,
For men so old as we tokeep the peace.
Of honourable reckoningare you both;
And pity 'tis you've livedat odds so long.
But now, my lord, what sayyou to my suit?
But saying o'er what Ihave said before:
My child is yet a strangerto the world;
She hath not seen thechange of fourteen years.
Let two more summerswither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripeto be a bride.
Younger than she are happymothers made.
And too soon marr'd arethose so early made.
The earth hath swallow'dall my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady ofmy earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris,get her heart,
My will to her consent isbut a part;
An she agree, within herscope of choice
Lies my consent and fairaccording voice.
This night I hold an oldaccustom'd feast,
Whereto I have invitedmany a guest,
Such as I love; and you,among the store,
One more, most welcome,makes my number more.
At my poor house look tobehold this night
Earth-treading stars thatmake dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lustyyoung men feel
When well-apparell'd Aprilon the heel
Of limping winter treads,even such delight
Among fresh female budsshall you this night
Inherit at my house; hearall, all see,
And like her most whosemerit most shall be.
Come, go with me.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; findthose persons out
Whose names are writtenthere, and to them say,
My house and welcome ontheir pleasure stay.
Find them out whose namesare written here!
It is written,
that the shoemaker shouldmeddle with his yard,
and the tailor with hislast, the fisher with hispencil,
and the painter with hisnets;
but I am sent to findthose persons
whose names are here writ,and can never find whatnames
the writing person hathhere writ.
I must to the learned.--In good time.
Tut, man, one fire burnsout another's burning,
One pain is lessen'd byanother's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp bybackward turning;
One desperate grief cureswith another's languish:
Take thou some newinfection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of theold will die.
Your plaintain-leaf isexcellent for that.
God-den, good fellow.
God gi' god-den.
I pray, sir, can you read?
Ay, mine own fortune in mymisery.
Perhaps you have learnedit without book:
but, I pray, can you readany thing that you see?
Ay, if I know the lettersand the language.
Ye say honestly: rest youmerry!
Stay, fellow; I can read.
'Signior Martino and hiswife and daughters;
County Anselme and hisbeauteous sisters;
the lady widow ofVitravio;
Signior Placentio and hislovely nieces;
Mercutio and his brotherValentine;
mine uncle Capulet, hiswife and daughters;
my fair niece Rosaline andLivia;
Signior Valentio and hiscousin Tybalt,
Lucio and the livelyHelena.'
A fair assembly: whithershould they come?
Up.
Whither?
To supper at our house.
Whose house?
My master's.
Indeed, I should haveask'd you that before.
Now I'll tell you withoutasking:
my master is the greatrich Capulet;
and if you be not of thehouse of Montague,
come and crush a cup ofwine.
Rest you merry!
At this same ancient feastof Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosalinewhom thou so lovest,
With all the admiredbeauties of Verona:
Go thither; and, withunattainted eye,
Compare her face with somethat I will show,
And I will make thee thinkthy swan a crow.
One fairer than my love!
The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match sincefirst the world begun.
Tut, you saw her fair,none else being by,
Herself poised withherself in either eye:
But in that crystal scaleslet there be weigh'd
Your lady's love againstsome other maid
That I will show youshining at this feast,
And she shall scant showwell that now seems best.
I'll go along, no suchsight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendorof mine own.
Nurse, where's mydaughter?
Call her forth to me.
Now, by my maidenhead, attwelve years old,
I bade her come.
What, lamb!
What, ladybird!
God forbid!
Where's this girl?
What, Juliet!
How now! Who calls?
Your mother.
Madam, I am here.
What is your will?
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret:--
Nurse, come back again;
I have remember'd me,thou's hear our counsel.
Thou know'st my daughter'sof a pretty age.
Faith, I can tell her ageunto an hour.
She's not fourteen.
I'll lay fourteen of myteeth,--
And yet, to my teeth be itspoken, I have but four--
She's not fourteen.
How long is it now ToLammas-tide?
A fortnight and odd days.
Even or odd, of all daysin the year,
On Lammas-eve at nightshall she be fourteen.
Susan and she--God restall Christian souls!--
Were of an age: well,Susan is with God;
She was too good for me:but, as I said,
On Lammas-eve at nightshall she be fourteen;
I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquakenow eleven years;
And on that day, of alldays of the year,
that she was weaned; Inever shall forget it.
For I had then laidwormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun underthe dove-house wall;
My lord and you were thenat Mantua:--
Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
When it did taste thewormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt itbitter, pretty retch,
To see it tetchy and fallout with the dug!
Shake quoth thedove-house: 'twas no need,I trow,
To bid me trudge:
And since that time it iseleven years;
And then she could standhigh alone; nay, by therood,
She then could run andwaddle all about;
For e'en the day before,she broke her brow:
And then my husband-- O,God rest his soul!
He was a merry man-- tookup the child:
"Yea," quoth he, "fallstthou upon thy face?
"Thou wilt fall backwardwhen thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?"
And, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch leftcrying and said "Ay."
To see, now, how a jestmight come about!
I warrant, an I shouldlive a thousand years,
I never should forget it:"Wilt thou not, Jule?"
Quoth he; And, prettyfool, it stinted and said"Ay."
Enough of this; I praythee, hold thy peace.
Yes, madam.
Juliet--
I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leavecrying and say "Ay."
And yet, I warrant, it hadupon its brow
A bump as big as a youngcockerel's stone;
A parlous knock; and itcried bitterly:
"Yea," quoth my husband,"fall'st upon thy face?
"Thou wilt fall backwardwhen thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?"
Pretty fool, it stintedand said "Ay."
And stint thou too, I praythee, nurse, say I.
Peace, I have done.
God mark thee to hisgrace!
Thou wast the prettiestbabe as e'er I nursed:
An I might live to seethee married once,
I'd have my wish.
Marry, that 'marry'
is the very theme I cameto talk of.
Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands yourdisposition to be married?
It is an honour that Idream not of.
An honour!
Were not I thine onlynurse,
I'd say thou hadst suck'dwisdom from thy teat.
Well, think of marriagenow; younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies ofesteem,
Are made already mothers:by my count,
I was your mother muchupon these years
That you are now a maid.
Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeksyou for his love.
A man, young lady!
Lady, such a man
As all the world-- oh,he's a man of wax.
Verona's summer hath notsuch a flower.
Nay, he's a flower; infaith, a very flower.
What say you?
Can you love thegentleman?
This night you shallbehold him at our feast;
Read o'er the volume ofyoung Paris' face,
And find delight writthere with beauty's pen;
Examine every marriedlineament,
And see how one anotherlends content
And what obscured in thatfair volume lies
Find written in themargent of his eyes.
This precious book oflove, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, onlylacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea,and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fairwithin to hide:
That book in many's eyesdoth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locksin the golden story;
So shall you share allthat he doth possess,
By having him, makingyourself no less.
No less!
Nay, bigger; women grow bymen.
Speak briefly, can youlike of Paris' love?
I'll look to like, iflooking liking move:
But no more deep will Iendart mine eye
Than your consent givesstrength to make it fly.
Madam, the guests arecome, supper served up,you called,
my young lady asked for,the nurse cursed in thepantry,
and every thing inextremity.
I must hence to wait; Ibeseech you, followstraight.
We follow thee.
Juliet, the county stays.
Go, girl, seek happynights to happy days.
Shall we on without aapology?
The date is out of suchprolixity.
But let them measure us bywhat they will;
We'll measure them ameasure, and be gone.
Give me a torch: I am notfor this ambling;
Being but heavy, I willbear the light.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we musthave you dance.
Not I, believe me: youhave dancing shoes
With nimble soles: I havea soul of lead
So stakes me to the groundI cannot move.
You are a lover; borrowCupid's wings,
And soar with them abovethe common bound.
I am too sore enpiercedwith his shaft
To soar with his lightfeathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitchabove dull woe:
Under love's heavy burdendo I sink.
And, to sink in it, shouldyou burden love;
Too great oppression for atender thing.
Is love a tender thing?
It is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous,and it pricks like thorn.
If love be rough with you,be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking,and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put myvisage in:
A visor for a visor!
What care I What curiouseye doth quotedeformities?
Here are the beetle browsshall blush for me.
Come, knock and enter; andno sooner in,
But every man betake himto his legs.
And we mean well in goingto this mask;
But 'tis no wit to go.
Why, may one ask?
I dreamt a dream to-night.
And so did I.
Well, what was yours?
That dreamers often lie.
Ay, in bed asleep, whilethey do dream things true.
O, then, I see Queen Mabhath been with you.
She is the fairies'midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than anagate-stone
On the fore-finger of analderman,
Drawn with a team oflittle atomies
Athwart men's noses asthey lie asleep;
Her wagon-spokes made oflong spiders' legs,
The cover of the wings ofgrasshoppers,
The traces of the smallestspider's web,
The collars of themoonshine's watery beams,
Her whip of cricket'sbone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a smallgrey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a roundlittle worm
Prick'd from the lazyfinger of a maid;
Her chariot is an emptyhazel-nut
Made by the joinersquirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind thefairies' coachmakers.
And in this state shegallops night by night
Through lovers' brains,and then they dream oflove;
O'er courtiers' knees, whodream on court'siesstraight,
O'er lawyers' fingers, whostraight dream on fees,
O'er ladies' lips, whostraight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mabwith blisters plagues,
Because their breath withsweetmeats tainted are;
Sometime she gallops o'era courtier's nose,
And then dreams he ofsmelling out a suit;
Sometime comes she with atithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's noseas he lies asleep,
Then dreams, he of anotherbenefice:
Sometime she gallops o'era soldier's neck.
Then dreams he of cuttingforeign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes,Spanish blades,
Of healths five-fathomdeep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at whichhe starts and wakes,
And being thus frightedswears a prayer or two
And sleeps again.
This is that very Mab
That plats the manes ofhorses in the night,
And bakes the elflocks infoul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled, muchmisfortune bodes:
This is the hag that, whenmaids lie on their backs,
Presses them and learnsthem first to bear,
Making them women of goodcarriage:
This is she--
Peace, peace, Mercutio,peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children ofan idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vainfantasy,
Which is as thin ofsubstance as the air
And more inconstant thanthe wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosomof the north,
And, being anger'd, puffsaway from thence,
Turning his side to thedew-dropping south.
This wind, you talk of,blows us from ourselves;
Supper is done, and wewill come too late.
I fear, too early: for mymind misgives
Some consequence yethanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin hisfearful date
With this night's revelsand expire the term
Of a despised life closedin my breast
By some vile forfeit ofuntimely death.
But He, that hath thesteerage of my course,
Direct my sail!
On, lusty gentlemen!
Strike, drum!
Where's Potpan, that hehelps not to take away?
Antony, and Potpan!
Ay, boy, ready.
You are looked for andcalled for,
asked for and sought for,in the great chamber.
We cannot be here andthere too.
Cheerly, boys; be briskawhile; the longer livertakes all.
Look to the plate; look tothe plate.
Welcome, gentlemen! Ladiesthat have their toes
Unplagued with corns willhave a bout with you.
Ah ha, my mistresses!
Which of you all will nowdeny to dance?
She that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hathcorns; am I come near yenow?
Welcome, gentlemen!
I have seen the day
That I have worn a visorand could tell
A whispering tale in afair lady's ear,
Such as would please: 'tisgone, 'tis gone, 'tisgone:
You are welcome,gentlemen!
Come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall!
Give room!
And foot it, girls.
More light, you knaves;and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, theroom's grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, thisunlook'd-for sport comeswell.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, goodcousin Capulet;
For you and I are past ourdancing days:
How long is't now sincelast yourself and I
Were in a mask?
Oh, by'r lady, thirtyyears.
'Tis not so much, 'tis notso much:
'Tis since the nuptial ofLucentio,
Come pentecost as quicklyas it will,
Some five and twentyyears; and then we mask'd.
'Tis more, 'tis more, hisson is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward twoyears ago.
Thirty.
What lady is that, whichdoth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?
I know not, sir.
O, she doth teach thetorches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs uponthe cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in anEthiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use,for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dovetrooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er herfellows shows.
Did my heart love tillnow?
Forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw truebeauty till this night.
Fetch me my rapier, boy.
What dares the slave
Come hither, cover'd withan antic face,
To fleer and scorn at oursolemnity?
Now, by the stock andhonour of my kin,
To strike him dead, I holdit not a sin.
Why, how now, kinsman!
Wherefore storm you so?
Uncle, this is a Montague,our foe,
A villain that is hithercome in spite,
To scorn at our solemnitythis night.
Young Romeo is it?
'Tis he, that villainRomeo.
Content thee, gentle coz,let him alone;
He bears him like a portlygentleman;
And, to say truth, Veronabrags of him
To be a virtuous andwell-govern'd youth:
I would not for the wealthof all this town
Here in my house do himdisparagement:
Therefore be patient, takeno note of him:
It is my will, the whichif you respect,
Show a fair presence andput off these frowns,
And ill-beseemingsemblance for a feast.
It fits, when such avillain is a guest:
I'll not endure him.
He shall be endured: What,goodman boy!
I say, he shall: go to;
Am I the master here, oryou?
Go to.
You'll not endure him!
God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a mutiny amongmy guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop!
You'll be the man!
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Go to, go to;
You are a saucy boy:
is't so, indeed?
This trick may chance toscathe you, I know what:
You must contrary me!
Marry, 'tis time.
Well said, my hearts!
You are a princox; go: Bequiet, or--
More light, more light!
For shame!
I'll make you quiet.
What--cheerly, my hearts!
Patience perforce withwilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble intheir different greeting.
I will withdraw: but thisintrusion shall
Now seeming sweet convertto bitter gall.
If I profane with myunworthiest hand
This holy shrine, thegentle fine is this:
My lips, two blushingpilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touchwith a tender kiss.
Good pilgrim, you do wrongyour hand too much,
Which mannerly devotionshows in this;
For saints have hands thatpilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holypalmers' kiss.
Have not saints lips, andholy palmers too?
Ay, pilgrim, lips thatthey must use in prayer.
O, then, dear saint, letlips do what hands do;
They pray, grant thou,lest faith turn todespair.
Saints do not move, thoughgrant for prayers' sake.
Then move not, while myprayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, bythine, my sin is purged.
Then have my lips the sinthat they have took?
Sin from my lips?
O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.
You kiss by the book.
Madam, your mother cravesa word with you.
What is her mother?
Marry, bachelor, hermother is the lady of thehouse,
And a good lady, and awise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter,that you talk'd withal;
I tell you, he that canlay hold on her
Shall have the chinks.
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account!
My life is my foe's debt.
Away, begone; the sport isat the best.
Ay, so I fear; the more ismy unrest.
Oh, nay, gentlemen,prepare not to be gone;
We have a trifling foolishbanquet towards.
Is it e'en so?
Well, I thank you all.
I thank you, honestgentlemen; good night.
More torches here!
Come hither, nurse.
What is yond gentleman?
The son and heir of oldTiberio.
Whee!
What's he that now isgoing out of door?
That, I think, be youngPetrucio.
What's he that followsthere, that would notdance?
I know not.
Go ask his name:
if he be married,
my grave is like to be mywedding bed.
His name is Romeo, and aMontague;
The only son of your greatenemy.
My only love sprung frommy only hate!
Too early seen unknown,and known too late!
Prodigious birth of loveit is to me,
That I must love a loathedenemy.
What's this? What's this?
A rhyme I learn'd even nowOf one I danced withal.
Come, let's away.